DOCS-4092, etc Java APM onboarding tutorials (host, container, cloud) (#16292)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/guide/tutorial-enable-java-aws-eks.md

{{< code-block lang="sh" >}}
git clone https://github.com/DataDog/apm-tutorial-java-host.git
{{< /code-block >}}

The repository contains a multi-service Java application pre-configured to run inside a Kubernetes cluster. The sample app is a basic notes app with a REST API to add and change data. The `docker-compose` YAML files to make the containers for the Kubernetes pods are located in the `docker` directory. This tutorial uses the `service-docker-compose-k8s.yaml` file, which builds containers for the application. 

In each of the `notes` and `calendar` directories, there are two sets of Dockerfiles for building the applications, either with Maven or with Gradle. This tutorial uses the Maven build, but if you are more familiar with Gradle, you can use it instead with the corresponding changes to build commands.

Kubernetes configuration files for the `notes` app, the `calendar` app, and the Datadog Agent are in the `kubernetes` directory.

The process of getting the sample application involves building the images from the `docker` folder, uploading them to a registry, and creating kubernetes resources from the `kubernetes` folder.

### Starting the cluster

> If you don't already have a EKS cluster that you want to re-use, create one by running the following command, replacing `<CLUSTER_NAME>` with the name you want to use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't already have an EKS cluster that you want to re-use, create one by running the following command, replacing `<CLUSTER_NAME>` with the name you want to use:
```

{{< code-block lang="sh" >}}
eksctl create cluster --name <CLUSTER_NAME>{{< /code-block >}}

> This creates an EKS cluster with a managed nodegroup to allow for pods to be deployed on. Read [the eksctl documentation on creating clusters][16] for more information on troubleshooting and configuration. If you're using a cluster created another way (for example by the AWS web console), ensure that the cluster is connected to your local `kubeconfig` file as described in that eksctl documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This creates an EKS cluster with a managed nodegroup where you can deploy pods. Read [the eksctl documentation on creating clusters][16] for more information on troubleshooting and configuration. If you're using a cluster created another way (for example, by the AWS web console), ensure that the cluster is connected to your local `kubeconfig` file as described in the eksctl documentation.
```

   {{< code-block lang="yaml" >}}
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: notes-app
          image: <ECR_REGISTRY_URL>:notes
          imagePullPolicy: Always
{{< /code-block >}}

2. From the `/kubernetes` directory, run the following command to deploy the `notes` app:
   {{< code-block lang="sh" >}}
kubectl create -f notes-app.yaml{{< /code-block >}}

3. To exercise the app, you need to find its external IP address to call its REST API. First, find the `notes-app-deploy` pod in the list output by the following command, and note its node:

   {{< code-block lang="sh" >}}
kubectl get pods -o wide{{< /code-block >}}

   {{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-java-eks-pods.png" alt="Output of the kubectl command showing the notes-app-deploy pod and its associated node name" style="width:100%;" >}}

   Then find that node name in the output from the following command, and note the external IP value:

      {{< code-block lang="sh" >}}
kubectl get nodes -o wide{{< /code-block >}}
   
   {{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-java-eks-external-ip.png" alt="Output of the kubectl command showing the external IP value for the node" style="width:100%;" >}}

>    In the examples shown, the `notes-app` is running on node `ip-192-189-63-129.ec2.internal` which has an external IP of `34.230.7.210`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In the examples shown, the `notes-app` is running on node `ip-192-189-63-129.ec2.internal`, which has an external IP of `34.230.7.210`.
```

3. Open up another terminal and send API requests to exercise the app. The notes application is a REST API that stores data in an in-memory H2 database running on the same container. Send it a few commands:

`curl <EXTERNAL_IP>:30080/notes`
: `[]`

`curl -X POST '<EXTERNAL_IP>:30080/notes?desc=hello'`
: `{"id":1,"description":"hello"}`

`curl <EXTERNAL_IP>:30080/notes?id=1`
: `{"id":1,"description":"hello"}`

`curl <EXTERNAL_IP>:30080/notes`
: `[{"id":1,"description":"hello"}]`

4. After you've seen the application running, stop it so that you can enable tracing on it:
   {{< code-block lang="sh" >}}
kubectl delete -f notes-app.yaml{{< /code-block >}}

## Enable tracing

Now that you have a working Java application, configure it to enable tracing.

1. Add the Java tracing package to your project. Because the Agent runs in an EKS cluster, ensure that the Dockerfiles are configured properly, and there is no need to install anything. Open the `notes/dockerfile.notes.maven` file, and uncomment the line that downloads `dd-java-agent`:

   ```
   RUN curl -Lo dd-java-agent.jar https://dtdg.co/latest-java-tracer
   ```

> 2. Within the same `notes/dockerfile.notes.maven` file, and comment out the `ENTRYPOINT` line for running without tracing. Then uncomment the `ENTRYPOINT` line, which runs the application with tracing enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Within the same `notes/dockerfile.notes.maven` file, comment out the `ENTRYPOINT` line for running without tracing. Then uncomment the `ENTRYPOINT` line, which runs the application with tracing enabled:
```

   For more secure deployments that do not expose the API Key, read [this guide on using secrets][18]. Also, if you use a [Datadog site][6] other than `us1`, replace `datadoghq.com` with your site.

## Launch the app to see automatic tracing

Using [the same steps as before](#configure-the-application-locally-and-deploy), deploy the `notes` app with `kubectl create -f notes-app.yaml` and find the external IP address for the node it runs on.

Run some curl commands to exercise the app:

`curl <EXTERNAL_IP>:30080/notes`
: `[]`

`curl -X POST '<EXTERNAL_IP>:30080/notes?desc=hello'`
: `{"id":1,"description":"hello"}`

`curl <EXTERNAL_IP>:30080/notes?id=1`
: `{"id":1,"description":"hello"}`

`curl <EXTERNAL_IP>:30080/notes`
: `[{"id":1,"description":"hello"}]`

Wait a few moments, and go to [**APM > Traces**][11] in Datadog, where you can see a list of traces corresponding to your API calls:

{{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-java-container-traces.png" alt="Traces from the sample app in APM Trace Explorer" style="width:100%;" >}}

> The `h2` is the embedded in-memory database for this tutorial and `notes` is the Spring Boot application. The traces list shows all of the spans, when they started, what resource was tracked with the span, and how long it took.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `h2` is the embedded in-memory database for this tutorial, and `notes` is the Spring Boot application. The traces list shows all the spans, when they started, what resource was tracked with the span, and how long it took.
```

On the Traces page, click on a `POST /notes` trace to see a flame graph that shows how long each span took and what other spans occurred before a span completed. The bar at the top of the graph is the span you selected on the previous screen (in this case, the initial entry point into the notes application). 

The width of a bar indicates how long it took to complete. A bar at a lower depth represents a span that completes during the lifetime of a bar at a higher depth. 

The flame graph for a `POST` trace looks something like this:

{{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-java-container-post-flame.png" alt="A flame graph for a POST trace." style="width:100%;" >}}

A `GET /notes` trace looks something like this:

{{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-java-container-get-flame.png" alt="A flame graph for a GET trace." style="width:100%;" >}}

### Tracing configuration

The Java tracing library uses Java’s built-in agent and monitoring support. The flag `-javaagent:../dd-java-agent.jar` in the Dockerfile tells the JVM where to find the Java tracing library so it can run as a Java Agent. Learn more about Java Agents at [https://www.baeldung.com/java-instrumentation][7].

> The `dd.trace.sample.rate` flag sets the sample rate for this application. The ENTRYPOINT command in the Dockerfile set its value to `1`, which means that 100% of all requests to the `notes` service are sent to the Datadog backend for analysis and display. For a low-volume test application, this is fine. Do not do this in production or in any high-volume environment, because this results in a very large volume of data. Instead, sample some of your requests. Pick a value between 0 and 1. For example, `-Ddd.trace.sample.rate=0.1` sends traces for 10% of your requests to Datadog. Read more about [tracing configuration settings][14] and [sampling mechanisms][15].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dd.trace.sample.rate` flag sets the sample rate for this application. The ENTRYPOINT command in the Dockerfile sets its value to `1`, which means that 100% of all requests to the `notes` service are sent to the Datadog backend for analysis and display. For a low-volume test application, this is fine. Do not do this in production or in any high-volume environment, because this results in a very large volume of data. Instead, sample some of your requests. Pick a value between 0 and 1. For example, `-Ddd.trace.sample.rate=0.1` sends traces for 10% of your requests to Datadog. Read more about [tracing configuration settings][14] and [sampling mechanisms][15].
```

> Notice that the sampling rate flag in the command appears _before_ the `-jar` flag. That’s because this is a parameter for the Java Virtual Machine and not for your application. Make sure that when you add the Java Agent to your application, you specify the flag in the right location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the sampling rate flag in the command appears _before_ the `-jar` flag. That’s because this is a parameter for the Java Virtual Machine, not your application. Make sure that when you add the Java Agent to your application, you specify the flag in the right location.
```

            Log.info(errorString.toString());
        } finally {
            span.finish();
        }
   ```

6. Update your Maven build by opening `notes/pom.xml` and uncommenting the lines configuring dependencies for manual tracing. The `dd-trace-api` library is used for the `@Trace` annotations, and `opentracing-util` and `opentracing-api` are used for manual span creation.

7. Rebuild the application and upload it to ECR following the [same steps as before](#build-and-upload-the-application-image), running these commands:

   {{< code-block lang="sh" >}}
aws ecr get-login-password --region us-east-1 | docker login --username <YOUR_AWS_USER> --password-stdin <USER_CREDENTIALS>
DOCKER_DEFAULT_PLATFORM=linux/amd64 docker-compose -f service-docker-compose-k8s.yaml build
docker tag docker_notes:latest <ECR_REGISTRY_URL>:notes
docker push <ECR_REGISTRY_URL>:notes
{{< /code-block >}}

8. Using [the same steps as before](#configure-the-application-locally-and-deploy), deploy the `notes` app with `kubectl create -f notes-app.yaml` and find the external IP address for the node it runs on. 

9. Resend some HTTP requests, specifically some `GET` requests.

> 10. On the Trace Explorer, click into one of the new `GET` requests, and see a flame graph like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. On the Trace Explorer, click on one of the new `GET` requests, and see a flame graph like this:
```
